Figure 1.
Map of the central Tien Shan and surroundings showing topography, shallow‐focus seismicity, selected cities, and the trace of the Talas‐Ferghana fault (TFF). Gray circles show events with precise locations given and updated by Engdahl et al. [1998], and blue stars show events with 7 ≤ M < 8 and M ≥ 8 from Molnar and Deng [1984]. The inset shows the regional setting of the Tien Shan.

Figure 2. 
Map of region with GPS points and showing names of key localities, lines of profiles in Figures 4, 5, 7, and 9, and regions where smaller maps are shown. The region labeled 1 is shown in Figure 6, and that labeled 2 is in Figure 8.

Figure 3.
Map of region with GPS velocities, relative to Eurasia. Error ellipses show 95% confidence ellipses.

Figure 4.
(a–d) Profiles of components of velocity across the Tien Shan relative to Eurasia (profiles A‐A′ to D‐D′ in Figure 2). As shown in the legend below profile A, components perpendicular to the Tien Shan (and parallel to profiles) are shown with red squares and black diamonds, and components parallel to the Tien Shan (and perpendicular to profiles) are shown with blue and green triangles. Thus, positive values show convergent (approximately northward) components, or movement to the right (approximately eastward). Error bars give 1s uncertainties. Black squares and blue upward pointing triangles show rates of points that lie within 75 km to the west, and red squares and green downward pointing triangles show points within 75 km to the east of the profiles in Figure 2. Thrust fault symbols are shown where active thrust faults have been mapped, as by Thompson et al. [2002] for profile A, or inferred from sharp breaks in the topography.

Figure 5. Profile of components of velocity across the eastern Pamir into the Tarim Basin relative to Eurasia (profile E‐E′ in Figure 2). Positive values for black diamonds and red squares indicate approximately eastward components, and the more negative values at points to the west imply divergence along the profile. Positive values for blue upward pointing triangles and green downward pointing triangles indicate movement to the right of the profile and hence approximately southward movement relative to Eurasia. Error bars give 1s uncertainties. Black diamonds and blue upward pointing triangles show rates of points within 75 km to the north of profile E‐E′ in Figure 2, and red squares and green downward pointing triangles show points within 75 km to the south it.

Figure 6. Map of Tien Shan with GPS velocities relative to Eurasia (box 1 in Figure 2). Error ellipses show 95% confidence ellipses.

Figure 7. Profile of components of velocity across the Pamir, parts of Ferghana Valley and Tien Shan, and regions farther north relative to Eurasia (profile F‐F′ in Figure 2). Components perpendicular to the Alay Valley and Trans‐Alay Range (and parallel to the profile) are shown with red squares and black diamonds, and components parallel to them (and perpendicular to profiles) are shown with blue and green triangles. Positive values show convergent (approximately northward) components, or movement to the right (approximately eastward). Error bars give 1s uncertainties. Black squares and blue upward pointing triangles show rates of points that lie within 75 km to the west, and red squares and green downward pointing triangles show points within 75 km to the east of profile F‐F′ in Figure 2. Thrust fault symbols are shown where active thrust faults have been mapped by Arrowsmith and Strecker, inferred from seismicity, or from sharp breaks in the topography, and the position of the Talas‐Ferghana strike‐slip fault is inferred from its obvious expression in the topography.

Figure 8. Map of Ferghana Valley and surrounding region with GPS velocities (black and red arrows) relative to Eurasia (region 2 in Figure 2). Red arrows show points that are assumed to be part of the Ferghana Valley, and blue arrows show velocities calculated assuming that the region including those points (1) contracts at rates of 15 × 10−9 yr−1 oriented N157°E, and at 1.5 × 10−9 yr−1 at N67°E, and (2) rotates about an axis at 67.5°E ± 0.7°E, 39.9°N ± 0.4°N at a rate of −0.73° ± 0.08° Myr−1 with respect to Eurasia. Error ellipses show 95% confidence regions.

Figure 9. Profiles of components of velocity across the Ferghana Valley, Talas‐Ferghana fault, and western Tien Shan relative to Eurasia (profiles G‐G′ and H‐H′ in Figure 2). Positive values for black diamonds and red squares indicate approximately eastward components, and those for blue and green triangles show movement to the right of the profiles, approximately southward. Error bars give 1s uncertainties. Black diamonds and blue upward pointing triangles show rates for points within 75 km to the north of profiles G‐G′ and H‐H′ in Figure 2, and red squares and green downward pointing triangles show points within 75 km to the south of those profiles. Symbols showing strike‐slip faulting indicate the position of the Talas‐Ferghana fault, as inferred from the detailed topography.