GPS velocity field for the Tien Shan and surrounding regions

Measurements at ∼400 campaign‐style GPS points and another 14 continuously recording stations in central Asia define variations in their velocities both along and across the Kyrgyz and neighboring parts of Tien Shan. They show that at the longitude of Kyrgyzstan the Tarim Basin converges with Eurasia at 20 ± 2 mm/yr, nearly two thirds of the total convergence rate between India and Eurasia at this longitude. This high rate suggests that the Tien Shan has grown into a major mountain range only late in the evolution of the India‐Eurasia collision. Most of the convergence between Tarim and Eurasia within the upper crust of the Tien Shan presumably occurs by slip on faults on the edges of and within the belt, but 1–3 mm/yr of convergence is absorbed farther north, at the Dzungarian Alatau and at a lower rate with the Kazakh platform to the west. The Tarim Basin is thrust beneath the Tien Shan at ∼4–7 mm/yr. With respect to Eurasia, the Ferghana Valley rotates counterclockwise at ∼0.7° Myr−1 about an axis at the southwest end of the valley. Thus, GPS data place a bound of ∼4 mm/yr on the rate of crustal shortening across the Chatkal and neighboring ranges on the northwest margin of the Ferghana Valley, and they limit the present‐day slip rate on the right‐lateral Talas‐Ferghana fault to less than ∼2 mm/yr. GPS measurements corroborate geologic evidence indicating that the northern margin of the Pamir overthrusts the Alay Valley and require a rate of at least 10 and possibly 15 mm/yr.

1. Introduction
Whereas slip on a single fault at a boundary between oceanic plates accommodates virtually all relative motion between the adjacent plates, intracontinental deformation commonly occurs by widespread deformation and slip on numerous faults. This form of deformation is particularly apparent where mountain ranges have been built in intracontinental settings, such as that in which the Rocky Mountains of the western United States developed in late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic (Laramide) time.
The Tien Shan serves as the prototypical active intracontinental mountain belt. Separate ranges, bounded on one or both sides by reverse faults and with intermontane basins between them, collectively form a belt of widespread deformation and abundant seismicity far from boundaries of the major plates (Figure 1). Such belts typify active deformation elsewhere in Asia, such as in Mongolia or on the northeastern margin of the Tibetan Plateau, and they characterize the separate ranges that form the Andes in parts of Colombia, Venezuela, Peru, and Argentina. In active intracontinental belts, several faults are concurrently active; no single fault defines a plate boundary. Lateral continuity of individual ranges, however, can be short, only 100–200 km, and slip rates on faults within the belts vary along strike.
The Tien Shan illustrates these features. Both field observations of active faulting demonstrate largely reverse faulting, in some cases with modest but not negligible strike‐slip components. Four earthquakes with magnitudes greater than approximately 8 have occurred within the Tien Shan since 1889. Studies of Quaternary faulting demonstrate slip at rates of 1 to 4 mm/yr on several approximately parallel faults that divide the belt into blocks tens of kilometers in width. Deep basins with 2000 m or more of late Cenozoic sediment lie between ranges. East‐west dimensions of such basins and of the ranges between them, however are only ∼100–300 km (Figures 1, 2, and 3). Accordingly, despite the linearity of the belt as a whole, along‐strike variations within it make finding a typical cross section difficult. Moreover, the deep structure of the belt, as reflected in both crustal thickness and upper mantle structure, shows marked differences both across and along the strike of the range.

To the south of the Tien Shan, the Tarim Basin (Figures 1–3) appears to deform sufficiently slowly that its movement relative to Eurasia has been described as a rigid body rotation about an axis just south of the southeastern edge of the basin. In most such treatments, root‐mean‐square (RMS) differences in relative velocities among points in the basin are less than 2 mm/yr, and as small as 1 mm/yr for some studies.

At the western end of the Tien Shan, the Ferghana Valley (Figures 1–3) also seems to undergo only mild deformation except on its edges. Mountain ranges to the north of the Ferghana Valley, including the Chatkal Range, and to its south, the South Tien Shan, absorb relative movement of the basin with respect to the regions on its flanks. Seismicity on the edge of the valley is relatively high, but only sparse small earthquakes have been located beneath its center (Figure 1). Sediment has accumulated within the valley since at least Mesozoic time, and high terrain seems to have surrounded the region for much of that time. Paleomagnetic declination anomalies suggest as much as 20°–30° of counterclockwise rotation of the basin and the neighboring Chatkal Range with respect to Eurasia. Thus, the Ferghana Valley seems to have maintained its identity as a block since Mesozoic time.

To the west of the Tarim Basin and south of the South Tien Shan, the Pamir shares features that typify the Tibetan Plateau: a high, relatively flat plateau (Figures 2 and 3), where normal faulting and east‐west extension appear to dominate active deformation. Many of the same east‐west trending sutures and fragments of Gondwana that had been accreted to Eurasia during Phanerozoic time can be identified in the Pamir and in the Hindu Kush of Afghanistan farther west, and it follows that the regions have undergone a similar geologic history, at least perhaps until the Pamir was displaced northward with respect to most of Tibet, presumably in Cenozoic time. Both the Pamir and Hindu Kush are associated with intermediate‐depth seismicity, whose form suggests the presence of a deformed, subducted lithospheric slab at depth. The inclined zone of seismicity projects to the surface at northern edge of the Pamir, where concentrated shortening occurs along the Pamir frontal thrust zone, suggesting subduction of continental lithosphere beneath the Pamir.

We present observations of present‐day surface motions within and around the Tien Shan based on 16 years of geodetic measurements from a dense, regional GPS network (Figures 2 and 3). These data provide quantitative constraints on deformation rates within and around the Tien Shan and in turn within this type area of intracontinental mountain building. A few points for which we can obtain GPS velocities lie within the Pamir, and they allow us to address deformation on its eastern and northern edges.

2. GPS Network and Processing
We report results from campaign measurements beginning in 1994 and from a growing number of continuously recording stations in the region since before 1994. In fact, the GPS network that we analyze began as three separate networks each of which grew over time (we give a summary of the history of these networks in the auxiliary material). Table 1 summarizes not only velocities and uncertainties of GPS points, but also dates of the first campaigns used in our determination of the velocity field, durations spanned by remeasurements, and numbers of remeasurement campaigns for each site. Table 1 updates results for subsets of these data analyzed earlier.
We processed the GPS observations using the GAMIT/GLOBK software suite, and we estimated uncertainties following standard procedures described by Reilinger. Appendix A gives some details of the processing.

3. Results
To present the velocity field we rely on both maps (Figures 3, 6, and 8) and profiles (Figures 4, 5, 7, and 9). We orient profiles perpendicular to the main structures, and plot separately components of velocity parallel and perpendicular to the structures, which allows convergent or divergent and strike‐slip components to be separated.
3.1. Convergence Between the Tarim Basin and Eurasia
Perhaps the most definitive result is the demonstration that the Tarim Basin moves toward the Kazakh Platform, and hence toward the Eurasian plate, at 20 (±2) mm/yr.
Earlier, Abdrakhmatov had inferred such a rate by extrapolating measurements within the Kyrgyz and Kazakh side of the Tien Shan to the Tarim Basin in China. With GPS data from the Tarim Basin, Reigber reported a rate of 19 ± 3 mm/yr for a station in the western Tarim Basin with respect to Eurasia. With more sites in both Tarim and especially within the stable Kazakh Platform, with more measurements at individual sites, and with a time interval spanned by initial and most recent measurements roughly twice that used by Reigber, we can refine the rate, as shown most clearly on profiles A‐A′ and B‐B′ (Figures 2 and 4). The lower rates shown for profiles C‐C′ and D‐D′ (Figures 2 and 4) derive in part from the southernmost points on these profiles lying within the deforming southern margin of the Tien Shan. Hence the velocities of these points with respect to Eurasia underestimate the convergence rate between Tarim and Eurasia.
As noted above, GPS data from the entire Tarim Basin, including a large area east of where we have data, show that relative to Eurasia Tarim rotates about an axis just south of the eastern end of the basin. Thus, these angular velocities require an eastward decrease of convergence rates of points in Tarim relative to Eurasia, as is apparent also for data along profile E‐E′ (Figures 2 and 5, blue and green points). These data, from the western part of Tarim, alone are inadequate to improve estimates of angular velocities of Tarim relative to Eurasia, but note that the eastward decrease in rates also contributes to the smaller maximum rates on profiles C‐C′ and D‐D′ than on profiles A‐A′ and B‐B′ (Figure 4).
At the longitude of the Kyrgyz, or central, Tien Shan (∼75°E–80°E), global GPS data show that India converges with Eurasia at ∼33 mm/yr. Thus, in this segment, shortening across the Tien Shan, by convergence between the Tarim Basin and the Kazakh Platform, absorbs nearly two thirds of India’s penetration into Eurasia. Although India seems to underthrust southwestern Tibet at ∼20 mm/yr, the orientation of the Himalaya at this longitude is not perpendicular to the orientation of plate convergence. Thus underthrusting beneath the western Himalaya absorbs only ∼12–13 mm/yr of India’s convergence with Eurasia at this longitude.
Estimated amounts of Cenozoic shortening across the central Tien Shan do not permit shortening at an average rate of ∼20 mm/yr for more than ∼10 Myr, and hence suggest a much shorter duration than India has been penetrating into Eurasia (since ∼45–55 Ma). For instance, assuming Airy isostasy and a Cenozoic age of present‐day elevations, Avouac inferred as much as ∼220 km of shortening. With present‐day knowledge of crustal thickness, however, this amount seems excessive. Using receiver functions from numerous seismograph stations, Oreshin and Vinnik reported crustal thicknesses of 55–65 km beneath much of the central Tien Shan, compared with ∼45 km not only beneath the Kazakh Platform to the north and the Tarim Basin to the south, but also beneath the Naryn Basin within the Tien Shan. Makarov inferred similar crustal thicknesses from seismic reflection profiling. Even if one allowed for 20 km of excess crustal thickness beneath a region as wide as 200 km, if that thickening were due to shortening of crust 45 km thick, it would call for only ∼90 km of shortening. From mapping of structures, Abdrakhmatov, inferred as little as 35–80 km of shortening across central Tien Shan in Kyrgyzstan, which constitutes roughly two thirds of the width of the belt. Similarly, both Chedia and Makarov calculated that 50 km of shortening suffices to account for the Cenozoic structure of the Kyrgyz Tien Shan. Heermance  offered a minimum bound of 10 to 32 km of shortening on the south side of the range. If between 100 and 200 km of crustal shortening occurred within the Kyrgyz and Chinese Tien Shan, then at the current rate, the entire range would have been built in only 5 to 10 Myr.
The rapid shortening today corroborates other inferences of a recent acceleration of deformation within the Tien Shan long after India collided with Eurasia. Abrupt increases in sedimentation in basins both within the Tien Shan and on its margins are commonly interpreted as evidence for the emergence of high terrain near or since ∼10 Ma. Rapid cooling of rock within the Kyrgyz Range beginning near 11 Ma also suggests an abrupt increase in exhumation rates at that time. Neither this evidence, however, nor the present‐day high convergence rate requires that the Tien Shan formed in late Cenozoic time. Mountain building deformation of the crust of the Tien Shan started near the end of the Oligocene or the beginning of the Miocene Epoch. Similarly, dating of deformation on the south side of the Tien Shan demonstrates active faulting beginning at 20–25 Ma, an inference consistent with both cooling ages near 25 Ma and changes in sedimentation rates in basins flanking the Tien Shan. Thus, an acceleration of convergence across the Tien Shan beginning at or since ∼10 Ma seems to be required, but we cannot distinguish a continuously increasing rate from an abrupt change near or since ∼10 Ma and a constant rate since that time.
3.2. Deformation Within the Tien Shan
As is clear both on maps of velocities (Figures 3 and 6) and on profiles of components of velocity (Figure 4), components perpendicular to the Tien Shan show a monotonically decreasing rate across the belt, from Tarim to the southern part of the Kazakh Platform. The velocity gradient is steepest at distances between ∼400 and ∼700 km for profiles A‐A′ to D‐D′ in Figures 2 and 4. In an analysis of active faulting in the area crossed by profile A‐A′ (Figures 2 and 4a), Makarov not only reported active faults on the edge of the Tien Shan, but they also described active faulting within the belt. Later, Thompson and Abdrakhmatov discussed four such faults within the high terrain of the range slipping at ∼1 mm/yr or more, and other more minor faults. In a profile of GPS velocities across this region, they showed steep gradients and high strain rates where they had mapped active faults. Moreover, the differences in velocity across these steep gradients matched (with allowance for uncertainties) the slip rates that they had determined for the faults. Our profile A‐A′ shows a difference of 8–10 mm/yr across the southern margin of the Tien Shan between 300 and 350 km on the profile (Figure 2), where Scharer had inferred a Quaternary rate of ∼5 to 7.8 mm/yr, a second difference of 3–4 mm/yr across the Naryn Basin (near 500 km) and near where Thompson had inferred slip at ∼4 mm/yr by dating warped terraces and offsets on faults, and hints of smaller differences of 1–2 mm/yr across steep gradients farther north near 600 and 650 km, again near faults that they had mapped. Moreover, as is clearer farther east on profiles C‐C′ and D‐D′ (Figures 4c and 4d), GPS points just north of the Kyrgyz Range move northward at 1–2 mm/yr with respect to the Kazakh Platform and Eurasia. Some shortening seems to occur not only within the Dzungarian Alatau (the high terrain between 44.5°N and 45.5°N on the eastern margin of Figure 6) and its westward continuation, but also north of it within the Kazakh Platform (Figures 2–4).
Indications of steep gradients in the velocity field are also present along profile B‐B′ (Figures 2 and 4b) at three places: (1) a difference of ∼5 mm/yr between ∼300 and 450 km, north of the southern edge of the Tien Shan and north of or within the fold‐and‐thrust belt that bounds the belt; (2) another of ∼5–6 mm/yr near 600 km, within the Tien Shan between the southern and northern edges of Issyk‐Kul and the large basin that it occupies; and (3) a hint of a steep gradient with a difference of ∼2 mm/yr near 700 km across the northern edge of the Tien Shan, where it bounds the southern edge of the Ili Basin (Figure 6). There is evidence for shortening between the Ili Basin and the Kazakh Platform, with 3–5 mm/yr of shortening across the westward continuation of the Dzungarian Alatau (Figure 6).
Indications of steep gradients suggestive of faults like those inferred by Thompson are present on profile C‐C′ (Figures 2 and 4c) again in three places: (1) a difference of ∼4 mm/yr between 500 and 550 km, north of the southern edge of the Tien Shan and north of the fold‐and‐thrust belt that bounds the belt; (2) another steep gradient with a difference of ∼4 mm/yr near 650 km, within the Tien Shan, just east of Issyk‐Kul and the large basin that it occupies; and (3) the suggestion of steep gradient with a small difference of ∼2 mm/yr near 750 km across the northern edge of the Tien Shan, where it bounds the southern edge of the Ili Basin (Figures 4c and 6). Points at the western end of the Ili Basin move 2–3 mm/yr with respect to Eurasia.
[20] With only sparse data, steep velocity gradients can be inferred for profile D‐D′ (Figures 2 and 4d), but they cannot be defined as well as on profiles A‐A′, B‐B′, and C‐C′. Several points in the Ili Basin, however, move northward with respect to Eurasia at ∼2–3 mm/yr, and that movement is absorbed, at least partly, by shortening across the Dzungarian Alatau. 
3.3. Strike‐Parallel Deformation Within the Tien Shan
Convergence of the Tarim Basin toward the Kazakh Platform is clearly oblique to the strike of the Tien Shan, and accordingly there is a left‐lateral strike‐slip component of movement parallel to the belt (Figures 3, 4, and 6). Because inferred axes of rotation of the Tarim Basin with respect to Eurasia lie south of the southeastern end of the Tarim Basin and therefore only 1000–1500 km from the Kyrgyz Tien Shan, directions of relative movement vary measurably over short distances (Figure 6). Points just south of the Tien Shan along profile D‐D′ move with a left‐lateral component of ∼4 mm/yr with respect to Eurasia, but points farther west along profile B‐B′ move with a left‐lateral component of only ∼2 mm/yr (Figures 4 and 6). The left‐lateral component on profile D‐D′ seems to be absorbed by shear in two zones, one (between 400 and 600 km) within the Tien Shan, and the other (near 800 km) at the edge of the Tien Shan and Ili Basin (Figures 2, 3, and 4d). On profile C‐C′, the left‐lateral component seems to be absorbed by more localized shear than data on profile D‐D′ can resolve and again in two zones, one near the southern edge of the Issyk‐Kul Basin, and the other at the edge of the Tien Shan and Ili Basin (Figures 3 and 4c). Localized shear zones are less clearly defined on profiles A‐A′ and B‐B′, in part because the component of left‐lateral shear along the Tien Shan is smaller there.
The west to east increase in the left‐lateral strike‐slip component along the Tien Shan requires greater eastward components of velocity at sites in the eastern part of the Tien Shan than in the western part (Figures 3, 4, and 6). In the west, velocities are nearly parallel to profile A‐A′, but for profile D‐D′ in the east, they show clear eastward components. Thus, there might be a small ENE–WSW component of extension along and within the Tien Shan, despite the dominance of thrust faulting shown by fault plane solutions of nearly all earthquakes in the region and by the absence of evidence of normal faulting. We presume that any extensional component of strain is accommodated by strike‐slip faulting or shear on planes oriented obliquely to the belt.
3.4. The Pamir and Shortening Across the Alay Valley
The network of GPS sites that we analyzed includes several sites in the northern part of the Pamir (Figures 2 and 3). Maximum north‐northwestward components of velocity relative to Eurasia exceed those from the Tarim Basin (Figures 2 and 4). This difference in velocity would be consistent with a small component of right‐lateral shear across the eastern part of the Pamir, where right‐lateral faults have been mapped. Such right‐lateral shear might be present, but when south–southeastward components of velocity are plotted on an east–northeast profile from the Pamir to the Tarim Basin (blue and green points on profile E‐E′; Figure 5), no obvious step in rates is seen. Rather this component of velocity increases smoothly from east to west. Because the strike‐slip component, which clearly exists in the southern Pamir, dies out to the north, it is possible that the GPS sites within the Pamir lie too far to the north to measure a strike‐slip component.
By contrast, east–northeastward components of velocity increase eastward, with a difference of 5–8 mm/yr between those within the Pamir and within the Tarim Basin
(near 300 km on profile E‐E′; Figure 5). Hence, the interior of the Pamir diverges from the Tarim Basin, despite the presence of folds and thrust faults along their boundary. This divergence attests to both east‐west extension within the Pamir, a result consistent with fault plane solutions of earthquakes, with the presence of grabens along the eastern part of the Pamir, and with velocities of a few continuous GPS sites in the Pamir and surroundings. The folding of Mesozoic and Cenozoic sedimentary rock along the western edge of the Tarim Basin implies convergence perpendicular to the eastern margin of the Pamir, but at present this convergence must be slow compared with the rate of divergence across a wider belt (Figure 5). We are unaware of evidence that constrains either when the divergence began or when convergence on the eastern margin occurred most rapidly.
Because of the paucity of GPS sites within the Pamir, its deformation field cannot be quantified in full. Nevertheless, as shown by profile F‐F′ (Figures 2 and 7), rates relative to Eurasia decrease by at least 10 and possibly by 15 mm/yr over a short distance that spans the Trans‐Alay Range (near 250 km; Figure 7), which marks the northern margin of the Pamir, and the Alay Valley just to its north. Although the rotation of the Ferghana Valley relative to Eurasia (discussed below) can account for ∼5 mm/yr of nearly ∼25 mm/yr of north‐northwestward convergence of the central Pamir with Eurasia, it appears that thrust faulting at the northern margin of the Pamir absorbs at least 10 and maybe 15 mm/yr of that ∼25 mm/yr of convergence between the Pamir and Eurasia. Such a rate is similar to the 13 ± 4 mm/yr that Reigber et al. [2001] had inferred, and consistent with triangulation measurements made farther west. 
Most, if not all, of this convergence between the Pamir and Eurasia may be absorbed at the system of thrust faults in the Alay Valley. The high level of seismicity in this region attests to localized deformation (Figure 1), and evidence of thrust faulting in this region abounds. Arrowsmith and Strecker measured a lower bound of 6 mm/yr for Holocene convergence at one location near 39.5°N, 72.6°E. The GPS measurements reported here suggest that localized convergence may be much more rapid than just 6 mm/yr, and perhaps occurs by slip on more than one thrust, or reverse, fault in this region. Obviously, with so few measurement points we cannot eliminate north–south crustal shortening within the Pamir as well, but both fault plane solutions of earthquakes and evidence of active faulting imply a preponderance of normal faulting and east‐west extension within the high axial portion of the Pamir. Thus, we doubt that reverse faulting and contraction at more than a couple of mm/yr occurs in this region.
This zone of thrust or reverse faulting along the Trans‐Alay Range seems to mark a zone of intracontinental subduction, where the eastern continuation of the Tajik Depression has been subducted southward beneath the Pamir. The suggestion of localized deformation at the foot of the Trans‐Alay Range, therefore, accords with this region being the surface manifestation of such subduction.
3.5. Rotation of the Ferghana Valley and Slip on the Talas‐Ferghana Fault
[28] West of the segment of the Tien Shan that separates the effectively rigid Tarim Basin from the Kazakh Platform to the north, the high terrain of the Tien Shan west of the Talas‐Ferghana fault splits into two belts that surround the Ferghana Valley, which also seems to behave as a block that deforms at most only slowly (Figures 2 and 8). With thick, poorly consolidated sedimentary rock, the Ferghana Valley offers poor sites for GPS points, and most sites have been installed in sedimentary rock exposed in folds on the margins of the valley. Rates of movement relative to Eurasia increase from low rates at sites in the southwestern part of the basin to higher rates near its northeast margin, consistent with rotation of the basin, with respect to Eurasia, about an axis near its southwest end. Sites on the southeast side, however, move faster toward Eurasia than those on the northwest side, presumably because they lie within the deforming margins of the Ferghana Valley. On the northwest margin, crustal shortening occurs with a NW‐SE orientation, and on its southern margin, north‐south shortening occurs. Field observations, geophysical profiling, and fault plane solutions of earthquakes suggest that the east‐west trending South Tien Shan, which is cored largely by Paleozoic metamorphic rock, has been thrust atop the southern edge of the Ferghana Valley. Thus, the counterclockwise rotation of the Ferghana Valley converts roughly north‐south movement of the South Tien Shan with respect to Eurasia, into NW‐SE shortening across the Chatkal and adjacent ranges that lie northwest of the valley. Using sites on the margins of the Ferghana Valley and allowing uniform strain among them, we estimate an angular velocity of the valley with respect to Eurasia given by counterclockwise rotation at −0.73° (±0.08°) Myr−1 about an axis of rotation that is located just southwest of the valley at 39.9°N (±0.4), 67.5°E (±0.7) (Figure 8). To determine that angular velocity, we used those points shown in Figure 8 with blue arrows superimposed on them; the blue arrows show calculated velocities for those points.
The eastern end of the Ferghana Valley is bounded by high terrain through which a clear right‐lateral strike‐slip fault passes, the Talas‐Ferghana fault. From several upper bounds of ∼10 mm/yr for the Holocene slip rate on the fault, Burtman suggested that the fault currently slips at that rate. By contrast, Trifonov  inferred that Late Quaternary and Holocene right‐lateral slip along the fault was not uniform along the fault, and that the highest rate of about 15 mm/yr occurs in its central part just opposite the Ferghana Valley. GPS data, however, including both analyses of a subset of the data that we present here and of other, independent data, showed that the rate must be much lower, < ∼2 mm/yr. The modest differences in velocities of sites on the two sides of the fault (Figures 8 and
9) demonstrate that the slip rate indeed is small, no more than ∼1–2 mm/yr. Profiles of GPS velocities (Figure 9), in fact, give little indication of any slip at all. Moreover, the obliquity of the fault to the direction of movement of the Ferghana Valley, relative to Eurasia, attest to a small component of convergence perpendicular to the fault, which presumably manifests itself, at least in part, in the presence of high terrain southwest of the fault.

4. Conclusions
The GPS data presented here demonstrate that the western part of the Tarim Basin converges with Eurasia at 20 ± 2 mm/yr (Figures 2 and 4, profiles A‐A′ and B‐B′),
where convergence between India and Eurasia is only ∼33 mm/yr. At a convergence rate of 20 mm/yr the entire Tien Shan would have been built in less than 10 Ma. Thus, these data suggest that following slow initial growth, the Tien Shan did not develop into a major mountain belt until late in the history of convergence between India and Eurasia. Most of the convergence between the Tarim Basin and the Kazakh Platform is absorbed within the Tien Shan, presumably by slip on thrust or reverse faults; localized zones of shortening at rates of ∼2 mm/yr to as many as 6 mm/yr lie within the Tien Shan. In addition, shortening at ∼1–3 mm/yr occurs north of the belt, within the Dzungarian Alatau and its westward continuation, and possibly also in the southern part of the Kazakh Platform. Moreover, the
movement of the Tarim Basin toward the Kazakh Platform includes a left‐lateral strike‐slip component parallel to the Tien Shan of ∼4 mm/yr in the eastern part of our network, decreasing to only ∼2 mm/yr at the western end of the belt, which we associate with clockwise rotation of the Tarim Basin with respect to Eurasia.
GPS data surrounding the Ferghana Valley corroborate the inference that this basin has rotated around an axis southwest of the valley, and refine the angular velocity of that motion (Figure 8). Shortening across the Chatkal and parallel mountain ranges that lie along the northwestern margin of the valley occurs at ∼5 mm/yr. Slip on the Talas‐Ferghana fault, at the eastern end of the Ferghana Valley, occurs at <∼2 mm/yr (Figure 9).
Convergence between the Tarim Basin and the Kazakh Platform is absorbed over a region more than 200 km wide, and although it is not uniformly distributed, no single predominant fault absorbs the majority of this convergence. By contrast, the Pamir seems to move northward toward Eurasia with a large fraction absorbed near the Alay Valley, which lies just north of the Trans‐Alay Range and bounds the northern edge of the Pamir. The shortening rate in this zone is at least 10 and perhaps 15 mm/yr, similar to what Reigber had inferred from fewer measurements. Moreover, the northern part of the Pamir diverges westward from the Tarim Basin at 5–8 mm/yr, a result consistent with the presence of grabens in the eastern Pamir, with fault plane solutions of earthquakes that demonstrate normal faulting and east‐west extension, and with sparse continuous GPS measurements.

Appendix A: Processing of GPS Observations
We analyzed the GPS data using the GAMIT/GLOBK software with a three‐step approach. In the first step, for each day we used GPS phase observations to estimate station coordinates and the zenith delay of the atmosphere at each station that recorded GPS signal that day, and parameters describing the orbits of the satellites and the orientation of the Earth. To tie the regional measurements to an external global reference frame in the next steps, we included 8–12 continuously operating IGS stations in the processing of data for each day. In the second step, we combined the regional daily solutions from the first step with global GPS analysis performed at Scripps Institution of Oceanography and saved them into a single file, for each campaign, as loosely constrained solutions of site positions. The Scripps global analysis contains over 300 stations and provides accurate orbits and positions of these stations.
In the third step, the combined loosely constrained solutions for each campaign were passed through a Kalman filter, GLOBK, to estimate a consistent set of coordinates and velocities. Before we estimated velocities, however, we examined time series of positions obtained in the two earlier steps to identify outliers and offsets or “jumps.” We removed outlier position estimates from the solution and covariance matrices used in the GLOBK Kalman filter analysis, and we accounted for offsets by allowing independent position estimates before and after the time of the offset. We used random walk variances of 1–4 mm2/yr2 in the forward run of the GLOBK Kalman filter estimate site velocities and “realistic” uncertainties. Except where indicated otherwise, we quote uncertainties as 1‐sigma estimates (Table 1), but in Figures 3, 6, and 8 we show 95% confidence ellipses.
We defined the reference frame for velocity estimates in the third step, when we applied generalized constraints and estimated the six parameters (three components of the rate of change of translation, three for rotation) that tie that reference frame to a global frame. In particular, we determined those six parameters by minimizing the horizontal velocities of 55 stable global IGS stations with respect to the ITRF2005 NNR frame and the rotated ITRF2005 EURA frame using the ITRF2005 angular velocity. The weighted RMS fit of the horizontal velocities to the ITRF 2005 EURA frame using 52 global sites as reference sites
was 0.4 mm/yr. In Table 1, we present these velocities and associated 1‐sigma standard deviations.